In the late 1800s, one vessel threatened
to change naval warfare forever.
The Peral was the first modern military
submarine and the first fully electric
one, able to fire torpedoes and navigate
underwater for hours when many ships
still sailed the oceans under wind
power.
It was meant to be the crown jewel of
the Spanish Armada.
A US [music] admiral even admitted later
that just one could have changed naval
warfare in a single day.
But before it ever saw battle, it
vanished.
To understand just how mind-blowing this
engineering feat was, we spent hours
rebuilding the entire Peral submarine in
3D to show how it worked and why it
never made its mark on the battlefield.
Submersible vessels had been imagined
and occasionally attempted for
centuries.
But most early designs were crude,
human-powered [music] craft that
achieved only limited success beneath
the water.
By the late 19th century, however,
several new technologies were beginning
to change what seemed possible. [music]
Lead-acid batteries, electric motors,
and self-propelled torpedoes were all
emerging at the same time, creating the
ingredients for a truly practical
submarine.
Spanish naval officer and engineer Isaac
Peral recognized [music] the potential.
He realized that these technologies
could be combined into a single,
radically new type of warship.
The project soon gained new urgency
after the Caroline Crisis of 1885,
[music]
a dispute between the German Empire and
the Kingdom of Spain over control of the
Caroline Islands in the Western Pacific.
During the incident, a German gunboat
entered Spanish-owned islands, raised
the German flag, and asserted Germany's
claim, an act that starkly exposed
Spain's vulnerability across its
overseas possessions. The incident
pushed the Spanish government to support
[music] Peral's proposal to develop a
submarine.
Initial work began in September 1885
[music] and just 3 years later, the
vessel was launched. During sea trials,
the Peral submarine proved it could do
what many believed impossible. Navigate
underwater, maintain a controlled depth,
and launch torpedoes.
And that is only the beginning of what
this remarkable machine was capable of.
The Peral submarine was built as a
single-hull vessel constructed from
riveted steel plates. [music]
In a single-hull submarine, only one
layer of steel separates the crew from
the surrounding ocean, a thin barrier
between the sailors inside and the
pressure of the sea outside. Despite its
compact size, the vessel packed
remarkable capability.
It weighed around 77 metric tons,
[music] measured 22 m in length, which
is about the length of two city buses,
and had a beam of just 2.9 m.
On the surface, it could reach 7.8
knots. [music]
Underwater, it could travel at about
three knots.
It could dive to a maximum depth of
around 30 m.
These capabilities were made possible by
a set of unusual systems, some of which
were so advanced their exact workings
were kept secret. Inside [music] this
narrow steel cylinder, a crew of up to
11 sailors operated the entire
submarine.
In a confined space like this, every
crew member had a critical role.
If someone became sick during a mission
hundreds of miles out at sea, there
wasn't a doctor available.
Thankfully, most of us aren't out at
sea. But even on land, finding the
[music] right doctor can still feel
harder than it should, especially when
you don't know where to start.
And if we're being honest, most people
put it off.
Not because they don't care, but because
the process is a hassle. The searching,
the calls, the waiting.
That's exactly why tools like Zocdoc,
today's video sponsor, exist.
Zocdoc is a free website where you can
find and book doctors all in one place.
You can search by condition, read
verified reviews, [music] and see
real-time availability. With over
150,000
providers and 200-plus specialties, it
makes it easy to find care that fits
your needs, whether it's in person or a
quick video visit.
>> [music]
>> What makes it useful is how simple it is
to actually take action.
You can find doctors who listen and
care, check their schedules, [music] and
book instantly, often the same day or
within 24 to 72 hours [music] without
calling or going back and forth.
If something's been on your mind, this
is a simple way to finally take that
step. Head to zocdoc.com/deconstructed
to find a doctor [music] that's right
for you.
>> [bell]
>> Now, let's take a closer look at the
submarine itself.
At the stern or rear of the vessel were
the main propellers.
Two propeller shafts each drove a
three-bladed propeller rotating in
opposite directions to generate forward
thrust. Just ahead of them were the
diving planes mounted on either side of
the aft section between the propeller
shafts and the hull.
These control surfaces adjusted the
submarine's pitch during dives and
ascents.
Steering was handled by a set of rudder
blades positioned above and below the
hull. By turning these rudders port or
starboard, the crew could change the
submarine's heading.
A protective framework surrounded the
rudder assembly, shielding it from
collisions and supporting the shaft that
controlled its movement.
Beneath the hull were another unusual
set of devices known as depth
propellers.
Mounted at both the bow and stern, these
propellers helped submerge the submarine
and maintain stability while underwater.
They were operated by one of Isaac
Peral's most closely guarded inventions,
a highly secretive depth control device
that allowed the vessel to regulate its
position beneath the surface with
remarkable precision.
We'll take a closer look at how that
system worked a little later. Moving
forward [music]
toward the middle of the submarine, two
ventilation cowls were mounted along the
top of the hull, both forward and aft.
These provided fresh air while the
submarine operated on the surface. At
the center of the vessel rose the
central turret, a small, raised
structure above the hull.
It contained several portholes and
observation windows, along with the main
hatch used by the crew to enter and exit
the submarine.
>> [music]
>> Mounted on top of the turret was a
dome-shaped housing that contained the
submarine's compass used for navigation.
Forward of it was the periscope, a fixed
observation tube that allowed the crew
to watch the surface while the submarine
remained submerged. But this was not the
kind of periscope most people imagine
today.
Its design was far more unusual and
we'll reveal exactly how it worked later
in the video. On either side of the
turret were small platforms with
handrails used by the crew when boarding
the vessel or during operations on the
surface.
Along the upper portion of the hull were
also several small portholes, which
allowed natural light to enter the
submarine's interior. Finally, at the
very front of the vessel, the bow, was
the outer door of the torpedo tube.
From the outside, it appeared as a
circular cap at the extreme end of the
hull. This tube allowed the submarine to
launch torpedoes toward enemy ships.
The outer door was opened and closed
using a worm drive mechanism. [music]
Inside the hull, a crew member turned a
hand crank connected to a shaft.
At the outer end of that shaft sat a
worm gear, which [music] meshed with a
worm wheel attached to the hinge of the
external torpedo door.
As the crank turned, the gear slowly
rotated the door open or shut. The Peral
submarine was one of the most advanced
naval machines of its time. And yet, it
would disappear before it ever entered
service.
That's why we turned this entire
reconstruction into a poster of the
submarine, mapping out its every detail.
Grab yours through the link in the
description. Every purchase directly
supports the channel and the team behind
it.
We're also giving one away. For a chance
to win one, like this video, subscribe,
and comment below. What surprised you
most about the Peral submarine? We'll
announce the winner in the next video.
And a quick shout-out out to our last
giveaway winner.
>> [music]
>> Congratulations.
Now, let's open the hatch and step
inside the Peral submarine to uncover
the unusual systems that allowed it to
operate in ways no other vessel of its
time could. At the stern of the
submarine were the systems responsible
for propulsion with several key
components.
Propulsion was provided by [music] two
22-kW electric motors, each driving its
own propeller shaft. The motors were
connected to the shafts through a
reduction gear system.
A small pinion driven by each motor
turned a larger gear coupled to the
propeller shaft, creating a three-to-one
reduction ratio that allowed the motors
to spin efficiently while delivering the
necessary torque to the propellers.
Between the two propulsion shafts sat
another motor.
This 3-kW electric motor powered [music]
the aft depth propeller, transmitting
motion through a bevel gear arrangement.
An identical unit was installed at the
bow to drive the forward depth
propeller.
Directly forward of the after depth
propeller motor was the ballast tank
water pump.
This pump filled ballast tanks located
along the bottom of the hull, allowing
the submarine to adjust its buoyancy
[music] before descending using the
depth propellers.
Forward of the pump, positioned between
the two propulsion motors, was a piston
air compressor.
Its job was to compress air into storage
tanks mounted inside the hull at
midships and at the bow.
This compressed air served several
purposes, most notably launching
torpedoes and helping regenerate
breathable air inside the submarine.
Mounted above the compressor was a 4-kW
electric motor that could power either
the compressor or the ballast pump.
A selection lever located beneath the
motor operated a bevel gear selector
mechanism, allowing the crew to engage
whichever machine was needed at the
time.
Just forward of the propulsion motors
was the diving plane control wheel used
by the crew to adjust the submarine's
diving planes and control its pitch
during ascents and descents.
Moving forward into the center of the
vessel, we reach the section dominated
by the submarine's batteries.
These batteries occupied more interior
space than any other component on board.
In total, the submarine carried 613
battery cells, [music] which supplied
electrical power to the entire vessel.
Altogether, they weighed approximately
30 metric tons.
If the submarine was operating on the
surface at 3 knots, this battery system
provided a range of up to 400 nautical
miles.
Directly beneath the central turret was
the command center. Just below the entry
hatch sat a second control wheel used to
operate the rudder blades.
The turret's windows allowed the crew to
see directly outside while navigating on
the surface, a particularly useful
feature during docking maneuvers.
Also located in the command center was
the optical table positioned beneath the
periscope tube.
At the top of the periscope tube was a
prismatic lantern.
Inside it, a reflective element
redirected the outside view down the
tube and projected [music] the image
onto the optical table whenever the
lantern was raised above the water
surface.
The table itself could be raised or
lowered to bring the projected image
into focus.
By observing that image, the crew could
estimate the distance to a target and
calculate firing solutions for their
torpedoes.
After the command center was one of the
most intriguing components in the entire
submarine, [music]
Peral's depth control device.
It was considered to be one of Peral's
most important innovations.
Yet, its exact operation is not well
documented, [music] partly because Peral
himself was extremely secretive about
the design.
Based on surviving drawings, however, it
likely worked in the following way.
The device appears to have been based on
a pendulum and hydrostat control system,
similar to the mechanism used in early
torpedoes to maintain a constant depth
automatically.
The system was mounted on a base plate
supporting three main components.
The first was the hydrostat, a mechanism
used to sense water pressure.
Peral's hydrostat consisted of a Bourdon
tube, a long flattened tube [music] bent
in a sinusoidal shape.
One end of the tube was fixed to a frame
and connected to the sea outside the
hull through a pipe.
As the submarine dived and external
water pressure increased, the tube would
gradually stretch, pushing its free end
outward along tracks on the frame guided
by small wheels.
But if the submarine relied on the
hydrostat alone, it would tend to
oscillate around the target depth rather
than hold it steady.
To address [music] this, the system also
incorporated a pendulum suspended from
the top of a separate frame.
>> [music]
>> The pendulum detected the submarine's
pitch, sensing whether the bow or stern
was angled upward or downward.
The third component was an electrical
contact plate, which likely acted as a
switch.
Pivoting around a central axis, it could
activate the forward depth propeller,
the after depth propeller, or both
depending on its position.
The two control inputs, [music] depth
and pitch, were then combined through a
mechanical linkage that regulated the
submarine's depth.
The moving end [music] of the Bourdon
tube was connected to a rod that drove
the upper end of this linkage, while the
lower end, the controller's [music]
output, operated the contact plate
through another rod.
The position of the linkage determined
how strongly each input [music]
influenced the system. In effect, the
device functioned as an early form of
proportional derivative control, a
concept that remains fundamental in many
industrial control systems today.
Finally, the system included a bell and
a horn,
>> [music]
>> which likely served as warning
indicators whenever the submarine
experienced extreme pitch angles or
significant depth deviations.
Moving toward the bow of the vessel, we
reach the torpedo launch system.
The submarine's torpedo tube was fitted
with two watertight doors, one [music]
at each end.
This design allowed the submarine to
launch a torpedo while fully submerged.
The vessel carried three torpedoes in
total. One loaded inside the tube and
two additional torpedoes stored inside
the submarine as reloads.
These were Schwartzkopff torpedoes,
German anti-surface ship [music] weapons
used in the late 19th century.
They were constructed from bronze,
[music] which helped resist corrosion in
seawater.
Each torpedo weighed 280 kg and measured
4.5 m in length.
>> [music]
>> The torpedoes were powered by compressed
air stored in a tank inside the torpedo
itself.
This compressed air drove an engine that
turned two counter-rotating propellers.
The air tank could be recharged in about
8 minutes using the submarine's onboard
compressed air supply.
>> [music]
>> Launching a torpedo followed a specific
sequence.
With the torpedo already inside, the
tube was first flooded with seawater.
The crew then rotated the hand crank to
open the outer tube door.
A burst of compressed air from tanks
mounted above the tube pushed the
torpedo outward.
Once clear of the tube, the torpedo's
own compressed air engine started,
spinning its propellers and sending it
toward its target. Their effective range
reached up to 400 m with a maximum
[music] speed of 25 knots.
Each torpedo carried an explosive charge
made of guncotton, [music]
an early high explosive that was
detonated when the weapon struck its
target. To show exactly how the tube was
reloaded after firing and how the
torpedoes were loaded inside the
submarine, we also made a dedicated deep
dive video that breaks the sequence down
in detail, available exclusively to our
YouTube and Patreon members.
And finally, like any vessel intended to
operate for extended periods, the
submarine also included a toilet.
This one was particularly advanced for
its time. Engineered to use compressed
air to expel waste directly into the
sea, even when the submarine was fully
submerged. Despite performing
successfully during its trials, the
Peral submarine never entered active
military service.
The project was ultimately abandoned,
undone by political opposition and a
deep skepticism toward submarines within
the Spanish Navy.
In 1890, the vessel was withdrawn from
service. Its equipment was removed and
the submarine itself was placed into
storage.
Years later, demolition was even
ordered, but the order was never carried
out.
Just 8 years after the project was
abandoned, Spain went to war with the
United States.
During that conflict, the Spanish fleet
was decisively destroyed. Looking back,
US Admiral George Dewey reportedly
reflected on what might have been when
he said, "If Spain had used even one
submarine like those invented by Peral,
I would not have been able to sustain
the blockade for even 24 hours." Today,
the hull of the Peral submarine survives
and can be seen at the Cartagena Naval
Museum in Spain, preserved as a rare
artifact from one of the most
forward-thinking naval experiments of
the 19th century. The submarine stands
as one of the great what if moments in
naval history, a design that appeared
decades ahead of its time, but arrived
before the world was ready to use it.
More than a century later, Isaac Peral's
legacy continues.
In 2023, the first attack submarine of a
new class named Isaac Peral entered
service with the Spanish Navy. While
some underwater vessels were built for
war, [music] others were built for
exploration.
In 1960, less than 70 years after the
Peral submarine, the bathyscaphe Trieste
carried humans to the deepest place on
Earth.
We broke down how it was built and how
it made that historic dive in this
video, so be sure to check it out.
Thanks for watching. Stay curious.